[18] Then, that man having listened to those unjust and harsh words of him who was evil-natured,
began to tremble.He thought: "Alas, the pitilessness! This woman was enjoyed by him in
many ways,so how, indeed, does he wish to kill her for the sake of a very small offence.Alas!
we, too, are terrified by fear for our livelihood whereby, indeed, we remain by the
side of this vilest of men that resembles a venomous serpent.In every way, I am in great danger.What
is it time for now? Or, I will speak to him openly; being openly spoken to, he
might sometimes turn away from this sinful and unlawful act."Having observed thus, distracted
in mind, and his thoughts melted by her exceedingly mournful lamentations, he said to
the minister Pracaṇḍa with folded palms and his eyes bathed in the water of his tears:"Let
my lord be pleased. It does not behove you to command me to perform such an unworthy act.I
am neither a hunter nor an executioner;how, indeed, does my master impel me towards that
act which the mind of even the executioners cannot endure.Moreover, this celebrated woman
is exceedingly beautiful, charming, pleasant, and conversant with all the arts. She is dear
to the clever people resident in Rājagṛha as well as those arrived from regions in the
various quarters.This is a source of pleasure common to all men.How is it indeed, my lord,
that in a wise and discerning man enmity has arisen towards an object of respect? Away, therefore,
with this resolve that produces impediments in both worlds.Be pleased; it does not
behove you to consume me as well as yourself with this fire of misconduct.Moreover, my
lord:

With delicate limbs and full of youth and beauty, she is indeed, methinks, the joy of men, incarnate
as it were. (1)With very piteous, sad and sweet words she does request you, my lord;
my heart she rends. (2)My heart trembles, now, hearing these raging words of yours. What
man of pitiless heart would he be that presumes to kill her? (3)Quite pitiless barbarians
even cannot bear to kill her. How, pray, my lord, could my mind bear to kill her? (4)Who,
being a human, would strike her with a weapon on seeing whom there arises great regard
even in animals? (5)Therefore, be pleased, my lord, it is improper for you even to hear such
words, still more so to commit this very terrible deed."(6)

