[90] Lamenting over herself thus in many ways, she embraced her son Virūpa, whose limbs were
smeared with streams of blood, and laid him in front of that destroyed lying-in chamber on
a piece of ground that was covered with a profusion of rubbish, pebbles, excrement, stumps
and prickles, and began to stroke him very gently with her hand.There, she saw going along
the middle of the street various sons of merchants and of caravan leaders as well as other
eminent brahmins and householders whose bodies were adorned in garments of fine cotton
from Kāśi, of koṭambaka cloth and of fine silk, all very expensive and variegated clothes,
with variegated ornaments of beautiful necklaces, chains, bangles, bracelets, ear-rings,
and full and half necklaces.Their figures were decorated with clusters of manifold full-blown
and fragrant flowers.Seeing them, her own very wretched state, and her son Virūpa who
was thus very sad-faced, she heaved a long and hot sigh and, with her eyes filled with tears,
said aloud in very pitiful words:

"Having come into being in a very great family full of many hundreds of abundances and resembling
the ocean with its treasures, and having enjoyed great comfort (1)we have now become
partakers of misfortune, dwelling in the midst of rubbish. Even with great hardship, we do
not obtain food and are hungry. (2)Emitting sounds such as "Ah!" or "Alas! we are smitten!"
we have entered the reservoir of streams of the water of poverty, the ocean of sorrow,
frightful with its waves of the water of pain and filled with hundreds of savage sharks of
repentance. (3)We have arrived upon the river of poverty, filled with thousands of crocodiles
of misfortune, restless with frightful billows of waves of calamities, and violent with
its dangers of being attacked by major diseases. (4)We have come upon the abode of the
sorrows of poverty, filled with hundreds of dwellings of birds of sorrow, with bowers filled
with the echo of lions of repentance, and bestrewn with rocks of pain and prickles of
disease. (5)Surely we did not formerly give alms to the good, our thoughts astray on account
of negligence, that now, in this world, wretched and unfortunate we should ever look upon
arrogant faces. (6)Deluded, we did not, for the most part, give alms to the wretched deserted
by fortune, whereby we have become destitute of even a mere shelter, whence, wretched,
we have come upon a more severe disaster. (7)Surely having met esteemed teachers upon
earth, they were not honoured and respected, whereby partaking of adversity we have now indeed
become subject to the disrespect of the people. (8)Surely many self-controlled ones were
beaten up by us in previous births, whereby these people beat us with stones and clods
of earth. (9)Surely venerable people have formerly been subjected to our abuse, that we have,
indeed, become wholly subject to the abuse of the world. (10)Surely an elder was formerly
reduced to contempt, that we have thus come upon contempt that is wretched and quite
dreadful. (11)We have not given garments to guests in a former birth, whereby we have no garments
now. (12)Many people have we made full of cries of lamentation, whereby indeed we
cry for long, pained and devoid of kinsmen. (13)A bed covered with a variegated covering was
not formerly given away, whereby we sleep upon the surface of the earth bestrewn with gravel
and stones. (14)Nor were splendid seats offered to the perfected ones, whereby the earth
is our seat full of many a prickle. (15)Formerly we did not give away a pair of sandals
nor a comfortable carriage whereby we roam upon the surface of the earth overspread with
prickles. (16)Nor indeed, on account of avarice for abodes, did we generally give even a
mere dwelling in a residence to people who requested it, whereby we are come upon a heap
of rubbish whose central region is radiant with the streaming rays of the sun. (17)Formerly,
having looked at them whose minds were desirous of drink, their mouths and cheeks dried
up and throats parched, we did not in this world, surely, give them water that was quite
cool-whereby we are now with mouths excessively dry. (18)Nor indeed was food given to mendicants
and to the wretched; nor were relatives, well-wishers or kinsmen honoured and regaled
with all sorts of food. Thereby, we wander about here deprived of food. (19)Those skilled
in the accomplishment of the welfare of others were surely irritated in quite a number
of ways by us in our different lives; whereby here even now, in an inferior world, we are
become very much a receptacle for abuse. (20)Surely, many virtuous ones too were beaten up
by us out of intoxication by the pride of superior birth, whereby we are now become subject
to coarse hardship. (21)We did not formerly give the medicament which dispels all fear
of sickness in this very ocean of transmigration; whereby we are oppressed by disease. (22)Father
and friends were not bathed, nor mother; elders were not gratified, nor the miserable;
whereby we are accordingly born in this world deprived of water for washing and drink,
smitten by misfortune, subject to hundreds of sufferings and devoid of a protector. (23)Exhausted
by hunger and thirst, deprived of food and clothing, and tormented by disease and
pain, who, indeed, would protect the two of us? (24)Whose slaves do we become today, or
whose attendants; who would today give us our life that is very difficult to obtain in this
world? (25)Alas! painful indeed is poverty, and alas! the state of not having performed
meritorious deeds! that even in such a flourishing city there is not a protector of us two."
(26)

Her mind afflicted with hunger, the caravan leader’s wife remained there lamenting over herself
in this and other ways.

