[47] Having heard that, the caravan leader, Divākara, like one that had lost and regained his
life, was very pleased and asked that lay-devotee excitedly:"Where does that Noble Ānanda
reside now?"He replied: "Caravan leader, it has been heard by me that the Elder Ānanda resides
at the moment at Vaiśālī, in the grove of Āmrapālī."Then, the caravan leader, Divākara,
arose immediately, placed his knees upon the ground,raised his hands in salutation in
the direction of Vaiśālīand, smitten by the pain of the sorrow of separation from his son,
his lotus-like face being filled with wave upon wave of tears, and his eyes filled with
tears, began to implore the Elder Ānanda, with great earnestness:

"If you, great teacher, are the best knower of the intentions of beings, knowing the inclination
of my intentions, listen to this request. (1)Entered into Nirvāṇa is the Fortunate One,
the Awakened One, so, too, are his disciples of great power. Of them indeed, only you remain
to promote the teaching. (2)You are the consolation of this world, you are the final
resort. Now, having examined carefully, you should do what is beneficial to all beings. (3)So,
while a protector, a defender, such as you remain, how is our child thus being executed
devoid of a protector? (4)If there was not to be advantage to beings, the likes of you
would not have remained. How do you thus remain indifferent towards a person full of faith
and about to be executed? (5)And, if you bear this body for the sake of advantage to beings,
then, O religious One, manifest your compassion, and turn your attention to my son. (6)Lift
up, together with my wife, me that am bereft of all remedies, without a protector,
destitute of a final resort and sunk in the mire of sorrow. (7)Whom else can I request, and
who else but you, O Master, has now been assigned for the welfare of the world by the Śākyan
sage? (8)Since there is no protector other than you, O Lord, for my son, it behooves
you to come quickly and protect my son. (9)O Ānanda, give delight to me along with my wife,
today to me who am without delight and seized by the evil-natured and unbearable enemy of
sorrow for a son." (10)

