[45] On hearing that, the caravan leader, Divākara, smitten by the shaft of grief that was doubled
on account of separation from the Fortunate One, fainted and fell upon the ground.Then,
regaining his senses with the sprinkling of water, he arose and facing the direction
whence the Fortunate One entered Nirvāṇa, began to cry out aloud:

"Alas, king of the Law, omniscient One, destroyer of the hostile host of faults, abandoning
a helpless man, why have you departed, O lord of the world? (1)Alas, lord, reputed for good
conduct, sole kinsman of all beings, detached from all bonds, indicator of the path leading
to Nirvāṇa, (2)alas, how indeed this world, its eyes enveloped by ignorance, will stray
about in the round of rebirth, forsaken by you, the protector! (3)You, heroic in your compassion
towards others, having entered into Nirvāṇa, this world is, indeed, without a protector,
what protector will it resort to? (4)And all those who are born from your law, sons
of the Victorious One, fit for conversion, bereft of you, whom will they make their refuge?
(5)You, O destroyer of pain, having fulfilled the hopes of many, which quarter have you
gone to, O sage, dashing the hope of man? (6)Should the citizens gather, eager to listen
to your pronouncements, who, now that you have entered Nirvāṇa, will preach the true law?
(7)Alas, destitute of light, this world is smitten, together with the gods and the Kinnaras,
since it is destitute of you, a rare protector, O sage. (8)Devoted to the law and fond
of the teaching, how, indeed, will beings act, having heard of the entry into Nirvāṇa of
you, their sole protector? (9)Who will again expound those excellences which are attained
having resorted to you that relishes only in compassion, that takes pity, and is steadfast?
(10)How, indeed, having given rise to great compassion in behalf of the three worlds, have
you, O Compassionate One, knower of the truth of the world, resorted to indifference? (11)O,
alas! the ship of the law, rich in the wealth of excellences, and put together during
krores of Kālpas, having reached the submarine abode of Death, has been destroyed. (12)O,
alas! that this world, blinded by ignorance, and deprived of the enlightened One as its
instructor, will become wearied, lost in the wilderness of (re-)birth. (13)Great indeed is
the loss that is at hand to the world which, here and now, is destitute of the great jewel
of the enlightened One. (14)How, now, will not the heart of the wise be torn with grief
on seeing the community of monks bereft of you, like a herd of cows bereft of a bull? (15)The
dust raised by the tips of the feet of whom, moreover, will the gods, their heads bent
down in devotion, bear upon their heads? (16)Cruel indeed is impermanence by which, coming
equally to all beings, partiality has not been shown even to you. (17)The doctor to the
sickness of the depravities, with the remedy of the eightfold path, the one of great compassion,
the teacher, the king among physicians, has been destroyed. (18)Alas! cruelly and too
quickly, the Leader of the world, the unsurpassed giver of eyes to the blinded world, has
entered Nirvāṇa. (19)Since you have entered Nirvāṇa, who will now come here and immediately
free my blameless and excellent son that is about to be executed? (20)But, as you, the
protector of the helpless, have gone to the highest abode, alas! I am now become devoid
of hope for the life of my son. (21)Those excellent words uttered by you, the magnanimous
one, that there will be separation from all beloved ones, are now clearly proven to me." (22)

