[48] Then, in the meantime, the Elder Ānanda, becoming filled with compassion and reflecting
for three nights and three days, examined the world with the eye of a disciple:"Who is declining?
Who is improving? Who has met with hardship? Who has met with danger? Who has met
with distress? Who has met with hardship, danger and distress?Who is headed for hell? Who
is prone to hell? Who is inclined towards hell?Whom shall I rescue from the path to hell
and establish in heaven and in deliverance?To whom that is sunk in the mire of desire shall
I lend a rescuing hand?Whom that is destitute of the noble treasures shall I establish in
the sovereignty and dominion over the noble treasures?"With eyes similar to those of the
Elder Śariputra, the Elder Ānanda saw the lad Suvarṇavarṇa who had accumulated a store of
roots of merit, but had met with hardship, danger, and distress.Having seen him, he then,
by his miraculous power, remaining just there, stretched out his hand that was like the trunk
of an elephant, and, immediately, with a snap of his fingers, having awoken king Ajātaśatru
who was on the terrace at the top of the palace and dwelling in excessive indulgence,
said with a penetrating voice:"Great king, you did not act rightly in that you did not
yourself investigate the lad Suvarṇavarṇa.Thus, indeed, this (lad) who is irreproachable and
harmless, having been driven out of the city, is now being taken to the great cemetery
for execution. Stop it."Then, having listened to that speech of the Elder Ānanda,the king,
becoming excited, quickly bowed to the Elder Ānanda, and remaining on the upper storey of
the palace, arose and called out in a loud voice towards the four quarters:"Sirs, please
listen. To whomsoever that would go quickly to the great cemetery and would, in my name, rescue
the lad Suvarṇavarṇa who is about to be executed,I offer a basket of gold and give excellent
villages."As that lad was dear to the populace, thousands of beings ran forth on
hearing the words of the king.

