[53] It occurred to him thus: "There is the Magnanimous One, the Elder Ānanda.I will call him
to mind.It is known that that Magnanimous One has a mental disposition directed towards
the welfare of all beings;and that the entire teaching was handed over to him by the Fortunate
One and by the Elder, the Great Kāśyapa.He, now, should look carefully and do what is
beneficial to all beings.He is possessed of great power and of great might. The Elder Ānanda
is capable of rescuing me from this calamity. I will call just him to mind." Having conceived
thus, his eyes flooded with the water of tears,vexed by the fear of transmigration,
and greatly moved, he began to implore the Elder Ānanda, with intense earnestness:

"Elder Ānanda, it behooves you to Listen to this entreaty of me who am frightened by the fear
of transmigration, and am devoid of joy. (1)The Omniscient One, full of compassion, has
entered into Nirvāṇa, having entrusted the care of the welfare of beings to you and to the
Magnanimous One, Kāśyapa. (2)The Elder Kāśyapa, too, his purpose accomplished, has entered
into Nirvāṇa, having entrusted that care to you yourself for the glory of the world. (3)Now
that the kinsman of the world, the fully Awakened One, active for the welfare of the world,
as well as the famous Kaśyapa have entered into Nirvāṇa, (4)you are the protector of
them that have no protector, the giver of fearlessness to the frightened, the resting-place
for the wearied, and the refuge of those that seek refuge. (5)The duties of the Master
have to be performed by you. You are the sole kinsman of the world. You are foremost of the
disciples of the Awakened One, and you are responsible for the teaching. (6)If you do not,
now, rescue me from the nether world of suffering, I am ruined, for, just now, I know no
protector other than you. (7)I fear not death - death is certain to one that is born - in
the same way as you, knowing an escape from the prison of transmigration. (8)Likewise, great
is my anguish that having obtained a favourable birth that is difficult to get and escaped
from the eight inopportune births, I should die without accomplishing my object. (9)Rare,
indeed, is the birth of the All-seeing, the Awakened Ones. Act in such a way that owing
to you, I shall not become fruitless. (10)Yours is unwavering compassion towards all beings;
so, it is not proper to disregard me that am desirous of the path to liberation. (11)And
if you, O highly Fortunate One, are one that strives for the welfare of all beings,
look upon me who am met with hardship, danger and distress. (12)So, with your divine eye having
seen me thus, destitute of protection, it behooves you, now, to come quickly and rescue
me." (13)

