[67] Now, in the meantime, the caravan leader, Divākara, smitten by the sorrow and pain of separation
from his son, was repeatedly rising and casting himself upon the ground at the junction
in the middle of the city of Rājagṛha, together with his wife.Again and again he rolls
to and fro upon the ground. He beats himself with his two hands. He laments with painful
cries:"Alas, son, alas, son."The caravan leader, Divākara, heard that the Elder Ānanda,
had come through the sky and rescued the lad Suvarṇavarṇa, and that wonders and miracles
were taking place in the great cemetery.Having heard so, greatly joyous at heart as if besprinkled
with a shower of nectar and with extreme happiness and joy arisen in him as if he
were anointed by consecration to universal sovereignty, he, together with his wife, arose
immediately and departing from Rājagṛha with a quick gait, arrived at the great cemetery.There
he saw the lad Suvarṇavarṇa (like) the full moon of autumn freed as soon as seized
by (the demon) Rāhu, seated near the Elder Ānanda,as well as that manifestation of might produced
by the effectiveness of the virtues of the Elder Ānanda.Then, having seen that very
wonderful miracle of his, capable of winning over gods and men,and begetting respect for
the Elder Ānanda, his thoughts overcome by the surge of extreme faith, he fell prostrate
at the feet of the Elder Ānanda.Having arisen, he placed his knees upon the ground and, out
of joy, his lotus-face being filled with streaming waves of tears,began to praise the Elder
Ānanda with folded palms: -

"Oh, in that you have rescued this person from a dreadful and great danger, magnanimity was
manifested by you, O highly Fortunate One. (1)Oh! the greatness of your compassion, Oh! the
wealth of knowledge! that you, like the Omniscient One, have manifested through your purity.
(2)Likewise, this dear son of mine was duly delivered from the mighty ocean of misfortune
through the power of your pity and knowledge. (3)If this one had not been heeded by you,
today, I would, indeed, he sunk for long in the mud of grief, together with my wife. (4)On
account of you, the offspring of Him of Great Compassion, I am from now on rescued from
the ocean of grief for my son and gone forth from the wilderness of grief. (5)I am freed
from the snares full of suffering, escaped from the prison of suffering, rid of the fear
of the fatigue of suffering and liberated from the cage of suffering. (6)Now, I am neither
stuck in the mire of suffering, nor pricked by the thorns of suffering, nor stung by the
serpent of suffering, nor pierced by the arrows of suffering. (7)Nor am I cut by the swords
of suffering, nor got at by the enemies of suffering, nor swallowed by the sea-monsters
of suffering, nor scorched by the fire of suffering. (8)Today, by you doing thus, the populace
has been illumined; their eyes have been made open, and their hearts delighted. (9)By
your affording protection thus, we are extremely delighted, and this name of yours, ’Ānanda’
(i.e. the Delight), has become quite appropriate in its meaning." (10)

