[71] Then, that great being, his mind overcome with pity, gladdening them with great words,
and filling the quarters with his voice, [said]: (1)"For this very purpose was this exhibited
to you by me. I will tell in due order, listen to these words of mine. (2)By meritorious
deeds one obtains abundance of wealth and of virtues. In this world and in the next; and
it is by meritorious deeds that I am possessed of great power. (3)If pain is not dear to
you, but abundance of happiness is, quickly perform meritorious deeds; happy is the accumulation
of merit. (4)Whatsoever abundance of happiness as well as bliss is obtained in this
world and in the next, that is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (5)What extensive wealth
the rich the merchants, the Brahmins, caravan leaders and others enjoy, that is the
fruit of meritorious deeds alone.(6)That men have a delightful abundance of women, servants,
children and friends, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (7)That a man is illustrious
having obtained abundance of beauty and charm that captivates the mind and eyes, is the
fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (8)That mortals indeed obtain an inalienable retinue
and an inexhaustible abundance of wealth, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (9)That
men attain recollection of former existences., good fortune, and acceptability of speech,
is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (10)That men, delighted, always in the company of
kinsmen, enjoy copious abundance of wealth, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (11)That
men have unlimited abundance of wealth, unrivaled and lasting, is the fruit of meritorious
deeds alone. (12)That there are indeed people in the region of Uttarakuru, who are
unselfish, have renounced possessions and are assured of a long life, is the fruit of meritorious
deeds alone. (13)That men enjoy there in very wonderful rice, grains of rice not ploughed
and sown, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (14)That therein men wear bright
clothes issuing from the wish-fulfilling tree, and ornaments, is the fruit of meritorious
deeds alone. (15)That men in the region of Uttarakuru, on dying, immediately become gods,
is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (16)That Nāgas in Pātāla, like divinities, enjoy
divine abundance such as feeding on nectar, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (17)That
lords of men attain abundance consisting of regal glory such as majesty, like gods,
and shine forth, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (18)That kings having become universal
emperors by their strength shine forth like the lord of gods, is the fruit of meritorious
deeds alone. (19)That a universal emperor, too, enjoys abundance such as the seven
jewels, complete and comprising all men, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (20)That
Daityas such as Vemacitra having obtained, enjoy prosperity equal to that of the Lord of
the Thirty-Three, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (21)What variegated splendour the
four guardians of the world such as Kubera, joyfully enjoy, that is the fruit of meritorious
deeds alone. (22)That the gods, together with divine damsels enjoy splendour of forest
parks such as Nandana, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (23)That the lord of the
Thirty-Three, ever delighted, enjoys manifold abundance such as kingship over the gods,
is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (24)That gods dwelling in aerial chariots enjoy divine
pleasures, as desired, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (25)That some gods are
superior even to (other) gods, in respect of the ten conditions such as life span, complexion,
strength, etc., is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (26)That the lord of the
sphere of desire enjoys abundance of enjoyment that is divine, variegated and the best in
the sphere of desire, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (27)That among gods and men
they effortlessly get their wishes as desired, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (28)That
gods such as Brahmā, contemplating in the stages of contemplation, attain the highest
happiness, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (29)That contemplators obtain happiness
born of contemplation, happiness arising from the removal of craving, and happiness
that is peaceful, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (30)That there are disciples of
the enlightened One possessed of noble qualities, of great power and magnanimous, is the
fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (31)That even those magnanimous ones who are Pratyekasambuddhas
(fully enlightened themselves) attain enlightenment after hundreds of Kālpas, is the
fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (32)That there are perfectly enlightened ones adorned
with unlimited peerless virtues, is the fruit of meritorious deeds alone. (33)By meritorious
deeds do men obtain women who abound in beauty and youth, are the ornament of their families,
and are well-disposed and attractive. (34)By meritorious deeds is heaven obtained,
of meritorious deeds are divine damsels the fruit: cherished success in all desires is obtained
by meritorious deeds. (35)By meritorious deeds is obtained a mind that is keen as well
as free from impurities: by meritorious deeds is obtained faith in the stages of ecstacy
2, by meritorious deeds is obtained clearer mindfulness. (36)By meritorious deeds are obtained
all the glorious magnificences of virtue: being beloved, eloquence, the possession
of a melodious voice and fame. (37)There is not that happiness in the world which cannot
be obtained by meritorious deeds. Therefore, those desirous of happiness should ever perform
the accumulation of merit. (38)Having performed a trifling act of merit towards the Tathāgata
Vipaśyin, fruit was exceedingly obtained by me in accordance with my desires. (39)Happily
did I enjoy the power of sovereign lordship in the six assemblies of gods for thousands
of crores of births. (40)Become universal emperors, etc., I enjoyed unlimited, peerless
and supreme abundance of pleasures, among men. (41)By the greatness of that act of merit,
wherever I was born I was exalted, and attended with happiness. (42)Handsome, endowed with
learning, and with a mouth possessing the fragrance of lotuses, (I was) beloved and of
acceptable speech, being endowed with a very pleasant voice. (43)Behold, even now, this cherished,
this pleasant abundance of virtues such as beauty of figure, the fruit of that same
act of merit. (44)I am born in a noble family of great wealth and possessions; my body
is clothed in garments resembling jambunada gold. (45)From my whole body wafts a fragrance
like that of sandal; from my mouth blows a fragrance, truly that of a blue lotus. (46)Whatever
abundance of garments and jewels I desire, all that, too, gets accomplished for me
by the mere thought thereof. (47)I have obtained ordainment, too, in the teaching of the Lion
of the Śākya’s. The state of Arhat, too, have I reached; become tranquil, I have attained
bliss. (48)This is my final birth, there is no further birth for me; I will not come back
(to the cycle of existence) again, free from the depravities, I will attain Nirvāṇa. (49)Even
now, being such, I do not realize the limit of the extent of the fruit of its maturing
which was produced by that act." (50)

