[93] The caravan leader Karṇa, too, went to the vicinity of his house and looked at what was
destroyed a while since, the remaining heap of bricks bearing the colour of the cemetery.Seeing
it, and again thinking: "What is this?" he entered that ruined lying-in chamber. There
he saw his wife staying with the female slave.Her face was quite emaciated and wretched,
the region of her hips was clothed in a dirty piece of garment, and her limbs were besmeared
with masses of filth. Again, having seen her, he said:"Alas! what is this?" and, fainted,
fell upon the ground.Being touched by the cold wind he regained consciousness after
a while, and having gone up to his wife, began to cry out aloud saying: "What is this?"Then,
having received the tidings from his wife, he heaved a long and hot sigh and said:"Surely,
I have not performed acts of homage towards those worthy of gifts, whence this misfortune
for me.So, what shall I now do here? To whom do I go for refuge?Whose face am I to look
upon? Who in the world is compassionate towards the destitute and the wretched?Owing to
whom will I cross over this mighty ocean of poverty? Owing to whom shall I wash off such a
mire of misfortune? Owing to whom shall I cross over this endless stream of sorrow?Owing
to whom, shall I vanquish this enemy of poverty? Owing to whom shall I uproot this creeper
of poverty, the source of all sorrows? Owing to whom, shall I root out this tree of poverty?Owing
to whom shall I banish this great demon of poverty with its face with the terrible
tusks of the pangs of hunger and its frightful roar of "Alas, Alas"?Owing to whom shall
I overcome this great wrestler of poverty? Owing to whom shall I extinguish this fire of poverty
with its flames kindled by hunger and thirst?Owing to whom shall I tame this great
elephant of poverty, haughty with misfortunes?Owing to whom shall I render free from poison
this great serpent of poverty with its poison-hiss of the manifold vexations of suffering?Owing
to whom shall I ward off this great warrior of poverty that plunders all one’s possessions?Owing
to whom shall I sunder this shackle of poverty, tight with every pain?Owing
to whom shall I step beyond this prison of poverty?Owing to whom shall I cleave this door-panel
of poverty? Owing to whom shall I make this Death of poverty full of despair?Owing
to whom shall I pass over this flood of dejection?Owing to whom shall I come out from this
great desert of poverty?" He cried out thus in manifold ways in piteous, wretched and faltering
words.

