[105] The boy Virūpa, his eyes dilated with joy, said in a loud voice:-

"Today, my mind tormented by the fire of the pains of poverty, I climbed the topmost branch
of a tree and hurled myself down. (1)Fallen down and pained by the fracture of limbs, I became
unconscious, and for a mere moment I remained motionless and breathless. (2)Thereupon,
the Awakened One, Vipaśyin, compassionate indeed towards beings, the protector, came to
this park out of compassion for me; (3)hearing the thirty-two marks, with his skin resembling
the colour of purified gold and filling the ten quarters with rays of liquid gold. (4)This
whole body of mine was gladdened being merely touched by his cool radiance, an unequalled
stream of nectar. (5)That very moment, my pain resulting from hunger, thirst and the
fall as well as all my inauspiciousness was allayed. I also regained consciousness. (6)Thinking
"What is this?" I stood up. Then, I saw the sage, extremely charming, the abode of the
splendour of beings. (7)Having seen this jewel, worthy of being seen, the protector, illuminating
all the quarters with extreme glory, then faith arose in me. (8)Then, delighted
at heart and with extreme joy, I cast upon him a small piece of clothing that was the colour
of tumeric. (9)I also cast upon him of true penance, one flower of the Karṇikāra; and
it stood over the sage like an umbrella. (10)Then, too, delighted at heart, I fell at his
feet and, full of faith, made this earnest wish: (11)’By this gift, O protector, may I, this
very day, cast off this ugliness and indeed become handsome, in the ocean of existence.
(12)Dressed in clothes of a golden hue, and covered with golden-yellow, may there be the
fragrance of sandal and blue-lotus from my body and my mouth.’ (13)Thus this earnest wish
was made by me; and there arose for me this figure having such a colour and attractive. (14)That
very moment, today, there suddenly manifested upon my body clothes of great value and
very soft and yellow. (15)From the sky the gods discharged this shower of flowers, and
the powder of sandal and aloe, tamāla, tagara, etc. (16)There was a great sound of "Ah, ah",
as well as the pleasant drum; the sound arose saying "Homage to thee, the Fortunate, the
Awakened One." (17)Today, having performed this meritorious deed, there appeared for me
this figure of such a sort, agreeable and having the colour of gold." (18)

