[108] Now, the caravan leader, Karṇa, came home. Thrilled, pleased and delighted, his wife received
him with water from a golden pitcher,and said to him: "Noble sir! by the power of
your merit someone has created for us such an excellent mansion".Then, the caravan leader
Karṇa looked at that excellent mansion and became greatly joyous and cheerful.With horripilation
produced an account of the faith that greatly arose within him towards the Fortunate,
the Awakened One, he made salutation with palms folded upon his head and said:"Homage be
to him, the Fortunate One, the Tathāgata, the Worthy One, the Fully Awakened One, the imponderable
wish-fulfilling gem, the supreme field of merit." His lotus-face filled with delight,
he declared:

"Ah, the field consisting of merit, devoid of all evil; the seed placed therein by me is immediately
productive of fruit. (1)How incongruous are that limited gift of mine devoid of all
perfection and this house beautiful, lofty and made of gold and precious materials? (2)How
incongruous are that house of mine with only its walls remaining, the augmentor of grief,
and this, white as the moon-beams free of clouds? (3)How incongruous are that house which
has openings made by rats and insects as its windows, and this, with windows of many excellent
jewels? (4)How incongruous are that house of old, pervaded by angry dogs and abounding
in prickles and impurities, and this splendid one heaped up with jewels? (5)How incongruous
are that with the slough of snakes for draping cloths, and this draped with a wealth
of fine cloth and variegated chowries? (6)How incongruous are that house with heaps of
white bones brought by dogs, and this decorated with discharged heaps of fragrant and excellent
flowers? (7)How incongruous are that house with its floor ever bestrewn with streams
of tears of grief, and this with sandal sprinkled with water fragrant with musk? (8)How incongruous
are that house with portals burnt by flames of fire and bearing the dirt of crows,
and this decorated with gold, pure jewels and garlands of pearls? (9)How incongruous are
that house protected by a broken gate with a single panel, and this covered with crystal
and equipped with folded panels? (10)How incongruous are that house of mine, a ruined lying-in
chamber, long destroyed, and this adorned with turrets and pillars made of jewels?
(11)How incongruous are that quadrangle filled with the sound of lamentation, and this filled
with the sound of musical instruments and notes of the lute? (12)How incongruous are that
house of old filled with heaps of dust and skulls, and this with its interior piled up
with heaps of many brilliant jewels? (13)How incongruous are that with all its pegs and connections
fallen apart, and this mighty one of crystal inlaid with sapphire? (14)How incongruous
is that devoid of seats and with bricks as the only resort, and this possessed of
hundreds of variegated, cloth-filled pillows? (14)How incongruous are that bed upon the surface
of the ground bestrewn with gravel, and this magnificent bed with large curtains?(16)How
incongruous are that bed of mine spread with grass upon the ground and very rough, and
this now spread with cotton and very charming? (17)How incongruous are that house with its
interior filled with dogs and stinking, and this residence with its inner apartments perfumed
with sweet smells? (18)How incongruous are that house of old covered with ragged strips
of cloth inside and out, and this, splendid and charming with decorations of various
fine jewels? (19)How incongruous are that trailed with hundreds of white lines of the dung
of crows, and this decorated with many large garlands of pearls? (20)How incongruous are
that house with hands uplifted with cries of lamentations full of grief, and this ornamented
with the raising of spotless parasols and banners? (21)Homage be unto him the protector,
the field of merit, the saviour, on account of whom, this very day, I have crossed over
the ocean of poverty. (22)Homage be unto the protector of the world, the omniscient Vipaśyin,
on account of whom, this very day, I have obtained such abundance; (23)on account of whom,
this very day, I have obtained a unique mansion, like Vaijayanta, beyond imagination,
and ornamented with many excellences. (24)Having encountered that teacher, a mansion was
obtained tall as the peak of Kailāsa, lofty and white as the autumn moon. (25)This very day,
having been destitute of a protector in this city and subject to the sufferings of poverty,
this very day I have become pre-eminent among all those possessed of great wealth. (26)Since
the seed, as soon as planted, produced results for me this very day, who ought not
to pay homage to that lord, the best in the world?" (27)

